Now, we are going to talk about joint control
with disturbances. And the most obvious disturbance,
the most common disturbance on a robotic arm
is the disturbance due to gravity. Imagine
a PUMA robot manipulator in this particular
configuration. It’s got its arm stretched
out horizontally and can you imagine that
arm weighs quite a lot. So, there is a large
torque on the shoulder joint and there’s
also a large torque on the elbow joint that
are required in order to keep the arm in that
horizontal pose.
We can look at a more simplified version of
that particular scenario. Consider here we
have an electric motor which is connected
to a horizontal bar. The bar has a centre
of mass and the centre of mass is a distance
r from the axis of the motor. And the bar
has got a mass of m and the bar has a weight
force, that’s the force due to gravity acting
on the centre of mass and that is a force
of mg acting in the downward direction.
Now, a force of mg with a lever arm length
of r results in a torque acting on the motor
shaft and the magnitude of that torque is
given by the mass times the gravitational
acceleration times the distance of the centre
of mass from the axis of the motor. In this
particular case, the torque is acting in a
counter clockwise direction. The centre of
mass wants to move vertically downward. If
we actually do the maths for the case we looked
at a moment ago, the PUMA robot with its arm
in a horizontal configuration, the torque
on the shoulder joint is 14 Newton meters.
If I assume that my arm is one meter long,
that’s equivalent to holding four kilograms
with my arm outstretched; that’s a pretty
difficult thing to do, though there’s a
lot of torque acting on the shoulder joint
of the PUMA robot. And clearly, this is going
to have an effect on the control of the shoulder
joint. So, let’s look now in some more detail
at our robot joint controller. And this is
a block diagram we introduced in the last
lecture. It’s a feedback controller. The
input to the robot joint controller is the
desired position, theta star. And the output
of the joint controller is the actual joint
position denoted by theta. And as we discussed
in the last lecture, I’m using the Laplace
transform of many of these variables; so not
their response in the time domain but their
response in the Laplace domain. And I denote
the Laplace domain by using capital letters.
So, that’s why I’ve used capital theta
here and here. Now within this control loop,
we have a control law, it might be a proportional
derivative controller, it might be a proportional
integral derivative controller known as a
PID controller and we have the gain of the
motor driver and we have the gain of the sensor
and we have the transfer function of the actuator,
that’s the electric motor which is driving
the joint. And that has parameters such as
the motor torque constant, KM; the inertia,
J; and the viscous friction, B; and S is of
course the Laplace operator. Now this is a
very idealistic representation. There is no
disturbance such as the force of gravity represented
in this block diagram. So, let’s do something
about that.
What I’ve done is I’ve moved the motor
torque constant out of the actuator transfer
function and made it an explicit gain block
which you can see here. The output of that
gain block is the actual motor torque.
Now what I’ve done is actually separated
the motor into two components. I have a component
which generates a torque and I have another
component which represents the inertia and
viscous friction of the motor.
Now, I’m going to introduce another summing
junction which is a where we inject the disturbance
torque. So at this particular summing junction,
we have the sum of the torque which the motor
creates and I add to that the torque which
is coming from the disturbance source. It
might be due to gravity. It might be due to
something like Coulomb friction which we talked
about in the last lecture and TD is the Laplace
transform of that disturbance torque.
The introduction of a disturbance, even a
constant disturbance, will cause an error
in the. If we now look a gain at that simplified
schematic, we have the actual angle of the
robot link and we have the desired angle of
the robot link. And we can see that the actual
angle is a little bit different, it’s downwards
because the force of gravity is pulling it
downwards and the motor controller hasn’t
fully opposed that force of gravity. The controller
that we just used is a proportional-plus-derivative
controller often known as a PD controller
and it’s very very commonly used in robotic
systems. So the torque produced by the PD
controller is a gain P multiplied by the error
between where I want the joint angle to be,
theta star, and the actual joint angle theta
plus another gain termed D multiplied by the
velocity of the joint that’s theta dot.
If we consider the steady state case where
the joint is not moving, it’s deflected
downwards by gravity; but it’s not moving
any further downwards; it’s in equilibrium;
then theta dot will be equal to zero. So,
we can eliminate that term. And if the joint
is in equilibrium, then the torque generated
by the motor and its controller must be equal
to the torque due to gravity. So, we can write
this relationship. And if we do a little bit
of rearrangement, we can see that the error
between where we want the joint to be and
where the joint actually is, is equal to MGR
divided by P, our proportional gain.
Now, there are some very interesting consequences
of that. And one is it if we want to reduce
this error, we need to increase the value
of P. If P is bigger because it’s in the
denominator, then it makes the error much
much smaller.
We are going to revisit the robot joint model
that we built in Simulink in the last lecture.
We’ve put the values of some of the parameters
into the workspace and this is our model and
we’re going to bring in my palette of useful
Simulink objects as well. The first thing
I’m going to do is to move all of this stuff
across here and I’m going to introduce a
new gain block which I’m going to drop in
here. And what I’m going to do is to remove
the gain termed KM from the numerator of the
transfer function and I’m going to put it
into this block here. So functionally, this
is exactly the same. We have a gain KM multiplying
this transfer function here. The output of
this gain block is the torque that’s applied
to the armature of the electric motor.
Now what I’m going to do is to introduce
a disturbance torque. To do that, I need to
find a summing junction and there’s a summing
junction and I’m going to edit this so that
it has got a plus in the upward direction.
I think that will do the trick and I’m going
to remove that wire, put the summing junction
in here, draw a wire from there to there.
And the disturbance force is going to come
from a step function, that’s the source.
Here we go. And I want my step to occur at
time five in the simulation. The simulation
runs for 10 seconds, so the disturbance will
occur at five seconds. Hence, it has got a
value of one.
So, I’m going to connect that into the summing
junction. All right, so what we have now is
a model like what we had before. But now,
I can introduce a disturbance torque which
also acts on the armature of the electric
motor. There are now two torques acting on the
armature. There is the torque generated by
the controller and there is the torque by
this external disturbance. Now let’s run
that. I’ll bring the scope into view, so
we can see that, just across a little bit,
and run my simulation. And the result looks
like this. Let’s zoom in a little bit, let's
auto-scale that and we can see that the motor
has been following the square wave moving
between minus one and plus one. But when the
external disturbance is applied, we see that
that has got a really big influence on the
position of the motor. We could see that it
has moved up and is now moving between the
3-1/2 and 5-1/2. So clearly this external
force has had a really big impact on the performance
of the motor controller and it’s not doing
the job that we want it to do.
So, we’ve seen that there are some consequences
of increasing the proportional gain P. Another
strategy that we can use is to add an integral
term and that turns our controller into a
proportional integral and derivative controller
very commonly known as a PID controller and
what we’ve added here is the integral term.
We have another gain I which is the integral
gain and that multiplies the time integral
of the position error, theta star minus theta.
What this means, in intuitive terms, is if there
is a position error, the integral gradually
increases over time and that increases the
torque that’s applied to the joint so as
to counter that particular error.
Now what we are going to do is to increase
the proportional gain of the system and see
if we can improve things, so here are the
parameters of our controller. The proportional
gain is equal to one. I’m going to double
that. I’m going to make it equal to two.
Close that and we’ll run our simulation
again and see what happens to the step response.
And now we see that the effect of the disturbance
has been attenuated. We can see now that the
effect of the disturbance is less because
we’ve increased the proportional gain.
Let’s increase it some more. I’m going
to increase it to a value of four, run that
simulation again. Now we see that the effect
of disturbance is even further reduced, but
we’ve also noticed that the amount over
shoot on our square wave response is much,
much higher and this is a consequence of increasing
the proportional gain and we can get around
that to some extent by increasing the amount
of derivative term, increase the amount of
damping that will reduce the amount of overshoot.
But there are other consequences besides.
What I am going to do is to add another scope
to this diagram. And bring in the scope here
and what it’s going to do is to show the
torque that’s generated by the motor and
let’s run this.
So, I have a new scope, let's open that up
and what we see here is the torque that we're
asking the motor to generate. Now, we can
see that there is spikes in the torque between
about plus five to minus five newton meters
of torque for asking the motor to produce.
As we increase the proportional gain, the
maximum torque that we ask the motor to produce
will keep increasing.
Any real motor has got a finite torque capability.
It can't produce an infinite amount of torque.
Now, ultimately, this is where the strategy
of increasing the proportional gain will come
unstuck. So, increase the proportional gain
we’re asking the motor provide more torque
and eventually, we’re be asking it to produce
more torque than it actually can do.
So, we’ve seen the effects of increasing
the proportional gain. We’ve seen the effect
of adding an integral term. So, third strategy,
that’s often use to eliminate this kind
of error and that’s to introduce what’s
called a feed forward term.
Here's our block diagram from earlier and
we are going to introduce a feed forward control
term. And the key part of feed forward control,
is that in many cases, we actually can compute
what the disturbance force will be. So, in
the case of gravity, if we know the joint
angles, we can compute what the gravity force
is on each of the joints.
So, we can come up with an estimate of what
the gravity disturbance is and this is got
to be really helpful to us. This is extra
knowledge about the disturbance in we should
be able to use it to cancel the disturbance
out. The way we do that is we add another
summing junction into our control law and
it's got a negative sign on it and so, this
has got a negative gain or it's a subtraction.
And then to make it to all work, to balance
out, we have to add a gain in here. This is
a gain of one on KdKm.
If you think about it, if we have our estimated
torque here, we divided by KD and KM here.
We multiply by KD and KM here. So, the overall
gain is now one and then we add that to the
actual disturbance and because of the negative
sign here, the disturbance is cancelled out.
This is the essence of feed forward control.
It is a really neat trick.
Another strategy that we can adopt is to increase
the integral gain at the moment is equal to
zero. So, I’m going to put the proportional
gain back to one and I’m going to increase
the integral gain to a value of one. We are
going to simulate that and see what happens.
What we see is that the over shoot on the
square wave response has been reduced. It's
back to what it was previously when we had
the proportional gain equal to one.
And here we can see the effect of the integral
term coming into play. When the external disturbance
is applied at time five, the error in the
control system increases. That is then integrated
over time to produce a torque which increases
over time so as to push the error towards
zero. We can see here the effect of the integrated
term ramping up. It’s pushing the error
down. From what we can see is an after short
amount of time, the upward of the integrated
has become equal to the value of the external
disturbance. And it has effectively cancelled
it out.
So, we can see towards the end of the trace
that the square wave response is pretty much
what we want it to be. The external disturbance
has been rejected. Let’s summarize.
We've looked at a number of different techniques
to reduce the effect of disturbance on the
position of a robot joint. We started off
looking at a very standard proportional derivative
typically known as a PD controller which got
a control law like this, a proportional gain
multiplied by the position error plus a derivative
gain multiplied by the velocity which helps
to control over shoot when the joint is moving.
We saw that the amount of error is inversely
proportional to the gain P. Now, we can increase
P to reduce the error, but that has a number
of adverse consequences such as increasing
over shoot or providing signals to the motor
that it cannot possibly achieve.
We then looked at an adding an integral term.
The intuition is that, with the constant error,
the integral over time is a signal that ramps
up which increases the torque so as to oppose
the torque that’s causing the disturbance
in the first place.
The third approach, we looked at, is feed forward
control which attempts to predict or estimate
the disturbance and then cancel it out. A
great advantage of feed forward control is
even if you have a not perfect estimate of
what the disturbance is, some cancellation
is certainly better than no cancellation at
all. In practice, we often use a mixture of
feedback and feed forward control. They each
have particular strengths and advantages.